Add requirements and linkage for inter-workload dependencies implementation in agent (#195)
eclipse-ankaios/ankaios: agent/doc/swdesign/README.md

when the inter-workload dependencies of a create are fulfilled.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### The agent shall enqueue create workload operations for updates with fulfilled delete dependencies
`swdd~agent-enqueues-pending-create-on-update-workload-operations~1`

Status: approved

When the WorkloadScheduler receives a `WorkloadOperation` to update a workload,
and the workload state of a dependency of the new workload is not fulfilling the configured `AddCondition`,
and the workload state of all its dependencies of the old workload are fulfilling the configured `DeleteCondition`,
then the WorkloadScheduler shall enqueue a create `WorkloadOperation` containing the new workload.

Comment: When the create of the new workload has already fulfilled inter-workload dependencies, the create `WorkloadOperation` is not enqueued.

Rationale: The agent shall delete a workload with fulfilled deletion conditions immediately to prevent
the old workload from existing on the Runtime for a long period of time until the create of the new workload can be executed.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest

> #### The agent shall report workload state WaitingToStart for workloads with unfulfilled add conditions

Author: Done and renamed

`swdd~agent-reports-pending-create-workload-state~1`

Status: approved

When a workload has an inter-workload dependency with an unfulfilled `AddCondition`
and the workload operation of that workload is enqueued into the waiting queue,
the WorkloadScheduler shall report the workload state `Pending(WaitingToStart)`.

Rationale: This communicates to the user that the workload is scheduled but not ready to create because of its unfulfilled dependencies.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

> #### The agent shall report workload state WaitingToStop for workloads with unfulfilled delete conditions

Author: Done and renamed

`swdd~agent-reports-pending-delete-workload-state~1`

Status: approved

When a workload has an inter-workload dependency with an unfulfilled `DeleteCondition`,
and the workload operation of that workload is enqueued into the waiting queue,
the WorkloadScheduler shall report the workload state `Stopping(WaitingToStop)`.

Rationale: This communicates to the user that the workload is scheduled but not ready to delete because another workload has a dependency to that workload.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

> #### The agent shall report workload state WaitingToStop for updated workloads with unfulfilled delete conditions

Author: Done and renamed

Comment: The Ankaios agent receives workload states from the Ankaios server and from the workloads the agent manages itself. Empty workload states are ignored.

Rationale: Whenever the agent receives new workload states or updates of workloads, the dependencies of a workload might be fulfilled.
Tags:
- AgentManager
- RuntimeManager
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

#### Agent shall enqueue workload operations with unfulfilled inter-workload dependency states into waiting queue
`swdd~agent-enqueues-workload-operations-with-unfulfilled-dependencies~1`

Status: approved

When the RuntimeManager receives a `WorkloadOperation` containing a workload with an unfulfilled inter-workload dependency,
the WorkloadScheduler shall put the workload operation into a waiting queue.

Rationale: The workload shall only be started when its inter-workload dependencies are in the desired configured state.

Tags:
- RuntimeManager
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

#### Agent handles UpdateWorkload requests from the server

> `swdd~agent-handles-update-workload-requests~1`

Author: I am not sure if I shall link this requirement to more tests inside the RuntimeManager, because the tests of the RuntimeManager needs to be refactored anyway because of the transform into workload operations now. The utests can be made easier in the RuntimeManager now.

Status: approved

When the AgentManager receives an `UpdateWorkload` message from the server, then the RuntimeManager shall update the workloads the message contains.

Comment: The `UpdateWorkload` message contains workloads to create, update and delete.

Rationale: This ensures separation between receiving the requests from the server and performing the requested actions.

Tags:
- AgentManager
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl

> - utest

Author: Shall I add stest for this? I think we have already linked stests for triggering workload operations like create, update and deletes. This is just a detail that was missing to link the AgentManager  to the RuntimeManager. This is why I added this req.

Reviewer: I don't think that stest is needed, as AgentManager and RuntimeManager are "internal components".

- utest
- itest

> #### AgentManager shall receive workload states of the workloads it manages

Reviewer: The most of the requirements' title is not in "shall" form, maybe we should stick to the simple present form for the title:
```suggestion
#### AgentManager receives workload states of the workloads it manages
```

Author: Done

`swdd~agent-manager-receives-workload-states-of-its-workloads~1`

Status: approved

The AgentManager shall receive the workload states of the workloads it manages.

Rationale: The agent uses the workload states of its workloads for handling inter-workload dependencies of workloads on the same agent.

Tags:
- AgentManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### AgentManager shall store the workload states of the workloads it manages
`swdd~agent-stores-workload-states-of-its-workloads~1`

Status: approved

> The AgentManager shall store the workload states of the workloads it manages into the ParameterStorage.

Reviewer: Hint: I think, the name ParameterStorage will be changed to WorkloadStateStore in PR of @krucod3.
Maybe you could sync about the merge strategy.

Author: I will take care of it when merging the main branch.

Comment: Empty workload states are not stored and skipped.

Rationale: This ensures that the execution states of a workload and its inter-workload dependencies on the same agent are available.

Tags:
- AgentManager
- ParameterStorage

Needs:
- impl
- utest

> #### AgentManager shall send the workload states of the workload it manages to the server

Author: Done

`swdd~agent-sends-workload-states-of-its-workloads-to-server~1`

Status: approved

When the AgentManager receives the workload states of the workload it manages, then the AgentManager shall send the workload states to the Ankaios server.

> Comment: Empty workload states are not sent.

Author: Done

Rationale: The Ankaios server stores the workload states of the workloads managed by the Ankaios agent.

Tags:
- AgentManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### Agent shall trigger workloads if its inter-workload dependencies are fulfilled
`swdd~agent-updates-workloads-with-fulfilled-dependencies~1`

Status: approved

When the agent receives an `UpdateWorkloadState` or an `UpdateWorkload` message, then the agent shall create, update or delete workloads having fulfilled inter-workload dependency conditions.

> Comment: The Ankaios agent receives workload states from the Ankaios server and from the workloads the agent manages itself. Empty workload states are ignored.

Author: Done

Rationale: Whenever the agent receives new workload states or updates of workloads, the dependencies of a workload might be fulfilled.

Tags:
- AgentManager
- RuntimeManager
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

#### Agent shall enqueue workload operations with unfulfilled inter-workload dependency states into waiting queue
`swdd~agent-enqueues-workload-operations-with-unfulfilled-dependencies~1`

Status: approved

When the RuntimeManager receives a `WorkloadOperation` containing a workload with an unfulfilled inter-workload dependency,

> the WorkloadScheduler shall put the workload operation into a waiting queue.

Author: Changed, but kept the "put" to keep it equal to other formulations.

Rationale: The workload shall only be started when its inter-workload dependencies are in the desired configured state.

Tags:
- RuntimeManager
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

#### Agent handles UpdateWorkload requests from the server
`swdd~agent-handles-update-workload-requests~1`

Status: approved

> When the AgentManager receives an `UpdateWorkload` message from the server, then the RuntimeManager shall update the workloads the message contains.

Author: I will keep the `then`.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

#### The agent shall not enqueue a delete only operation of an update
`swdd~agent-shall-not-enqueue-update-delete-only-workload-operation~1`

Status: approved

The WorkloadScheduler shall not put the update delete only `WorkloadOperation` into a waiting queue.

Rationale: The update delete only workload operation is internally created when the delete operation of a pending update is ready.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### A workload is ready to create when all of its inter-workload dependencies are fulfilled
`swdd~workload-ready-to-create-on-fulfilled-dependencies~1`

Status: approved

When the workload state of all inter-workload dependencies of a workload fulfill their configured `AddCondition`, then the Workload is ready to create.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler
- DependencyStateValidator

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### An inter-workload dependency is ready to delete when all of its inter-workload dependencies are fulfilled
`swdd~workload-ready-to-delete-on-fulfilled-dependencies~1`

Status: approved

> When the workload states of all workloads fulfill the respective `DeleteCondition` of an inter-workload dependency, then the inter-workload dependency is ready to delete.

Author: Here I would keep "fulfill" because that is used in all other requirements as well. And here are more details about what "fulfill" means exactly. Alternatively, I can rename the whole "fulfill" terms into "meet". I am painless there...

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler
- DependencyStateValidator

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### RuntimeManager transforms UpdateWorkload message into WorkloadOperations
`swdd~agent-transforms-update-workload-message-to-workload-operations~1`

Status: approved

When the RuntimeManager receives the workloads of an `UpdateWorkload` message, then the RuntimeManager shall transform the workloads inside the message

> into a list of `WorkloadOperation`s containing workloads to create, update and delete.

Author: Done

Tags:
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### ExecutionStates of inter-workload dependencies shall fulfill the AddConditions
`swdd~execution-states-of-workload-dependencies-fulfill-add-conditions~1`

Status: approved

The `ExecutionState` of an inter-workload dependency shall fulfill the `AddCondition` according to the following table:

| ExecutionState     | AddCondition        |
|--------------------|---------------------|
| Running(Ok)        | ADD_COND_RUNNING    |
| Succeeded(Ok)      | ADD_COND_SUCCEEDED  |
| Failed(ExecFailed) | ADD_COND_FAILED     |

Comment: When no execution state is available for an inter-workload dependency the `AddCondition` is not fulfilled, because the information might be available only later when the inter-workload dependency is processed the first time of Ankaios.

Rationale: The agent must be able to recognize when all inter-workload dependencies of a workload reach their configured expected conditions to create a workload.

Tags:
- DependencyStateValidator
- AddCondition

Needs:
- impl
- utest

> #### ExecutionStates of inter-workload dependencies shall fulfill the DeleteConditions

Author: I have changed it.

Comment: The `UpdateWorkload` message contains workloads to create, update and delete.

Rationale: This ensures separation between receiving the requests from the server and performing the requested actions.

Tags:
- AgentManager
- RuntimeManager

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### RuntimeManager transforms UpdateWorkload message into WorkloadOperations
`swdd~agent-transforms-update-workload-message-to-workload-operations~1`

Status: approved

When the RuntimeManager receives the workloads of an `UpdateWorkload` message, then the RuntimeManager shall transform the workloads inside the message into a list of `WorkloadOperation`s containing workloads to create, update and delete.

Comment: The list of `WorkloadOperation`s contains the actions on the workloads which the RuntimeManager shall perform.

Rationale: The inter-workload dependency handling requires the concrete information about the type of operation performed on the workload.

Tags:
- RuntimeManager
- WorkloadOperation

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### RuntimeManager executes create workload operation
`swdd~agent-executes-create-workload-operation~1`

Status: approved

> When the RuntimeManager receives the `WorkloadOperation` to create a workload, then the RuntimeManager shall request the RuntimeFacade to create the workload.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we mention the precondition that the dependencies must be fulfilled?

Author: Isn't it then the old problem again that the RuntimeManager does not know about when the dependencies are fulfilled?

What about mentioning it inside a comment of this reqs (and in the similar ones) or we connect here again the WorkloadScheduler by saying explicitly that the workload operations are received from it. Then it is according to the reqs `swdd~agent-handles-workloads-with-fulfilled-dependencies~1` and `swdd~agent-handles-new-workload-operations` saying already that the RuntimeManager executes the received list and the reqs here are saying how this is done with details. The only thing I see then is that we need to tag the WorkoadScheduler again inside this req.

Reviewer 2: I completely agree with you. We have mention already that the RuntimeManager receives the list of operations to be executed according to `swdd~agent-handles-workloads-with-fulfilled-dependencies~1`, I see the problem here that, as you mention, we also have another list of operations `swdd~agent-handles-new-workload-operations` and it is not explicitly specified which list is handled. As we have already defined the list of workloads with fulfilled inter-workload dependencies in `swdd~agent-handles-workloads-with-fulfilled-dependencies~1`, we don't need to do it again. In my eyes it is already sufficient here to mention the "fulfilled inter-workload dependencies":

```suggestion
When the RuntimeManager receives a create `WorkloadOperation` with fulfilled inter-workload dependencies, then the RuntimeManager shall request the RuntimeFacade to create the workload.
```

Reviewer 2: The same must be done in the corresponding requirements below.

Author: Ok thank you, I will adapt the three reqs and commit.

Author: I have adapted the reqs. I was just thinking about if I need to tag the WorkloadObject really with this. The WorkloadObject is mentioned inside the req texts, but it's more the call of the WorkloadObject not it's internal functionality of the triggered method. Therefore, I have decided to tag it only on the caller side in the runtime manager `workload_object.method...`.

Rationale: This communicates to the user that the create operation of that workload is scheduled but not ready because the create operation of the update waits for inter-workload dependencies and the create operation shall only run after completing the delete operation of the update with the default update strategy `AT_MOST_ONCE`.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest
- stest

#### The agent enqueues a delete only operation of an update
`swdd~agent-shall-not-enqueue-update-delete-only-workload-operation~1`

Status: approved

The WorkloadScheduler shall not put the update delete only `WorkloadOperation` into a waiting queue.

Rationale: The update delete only workload operation is internally created when the delete operation of a pending update is ready.

Tags:
- WorkloadScheduler

Needs:
- impl
- utest

#### A workload is ready to create when all of its inter-workload dependencies are fulfilled
`swdd~workload-ready-to-create-on-fulfilled-dependencies~1`

Status: approved

When the workload state of all inter-workload dependencies of a workload fulfill their configured `AddCondition`, then the Workload is ready to create.

Tags:

> - WorkloadScheduler

Reviewer 2: We are not mentioning the WorkloadScheduler in this requirement at all and I don't think we should tag it here. I understand that you want to include the DependencyStateValidator in the chain, but maybe this requirement here is only for it and the DependencyStateValidator should be mentioned above in the requirements that check the "readiness".
